{% include section.html dark=true%}
# <i class="fas fa-users"></i>Human Retina Atlas

A single cell atlas of the human retina that is composed of 2.5 million single cells from 48 donors has been generated by combining previously published and newly generated datasets. As a result, over 90 distinct cell types are identified based on the transcriptomics profile with the rarest cell type accounting forabout 0.01% of the cell population. In addition, open chromatin profiling has been generated for over 400K nuclei via single nuclei ATAC-seq, allowing systematic characterization of cis-regulatory elements for individualcell type. Integrative analysis reveals intriguing differences in the transcriptome, chromatin landscape, and gene regulatory network among cell class, subgroup, and type. In addition, changes in cell proportion, gene expression and chromatin openness have been observed between different gender and over age.

{% include section.html background="images/SCO2.png" dark=true%}
## scRNA-seq Datasets | A single-cell transcriptomic atlas for adult human retina
A fractionation protocol was developed to enrich nuclei from rare neuron cell types, including bipolar cells, amacrine cells, and retinal ganglion cells. In total, over 60 cell types are identified in our dataset, making the currently most comprehensive single-cell profiling of adult human retina.

{% include link.html type="external" link="https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/collections/af893e86-8e9f-41f1-a474-ef05359b1fb7" text="Explore" icon="" style="button" %}
{:.center}

## snATAC-seq Datasets | A multi-omics atlas of the human retina at single-cell resolution
Cell classes in the human retina are highly heterogeneous with their abundance varying by several orders of magnitude. Although previous studies reported the profiles of the retinal cell types as the transcriptome level, there is no study regarding the open-chromatin profiles at a similar resolution. Here, we generated and integrated a multi-omics single-cell atlas of the adult human retina, including over 250K nuclei for single-nuclei RNA-seq and 137K nuclei for single-nuclei ATAC-seq. Through enrichment of rare cell types, this single cell multiome atlas is more comprehensive than previous human retina studies. Cross species comparison of the retina atlas among human, monkey, mice, and chicken revealed relatively conserved and non-conserved types. Interestingly, the overall cell heterogeneity in primate retina decreases compared to that of rodent and chicken retina. Furthermore, integrative analysis of the single cell multi-omics data identified 35k distal cis-element-gene pairs with most of these cis-elements being cell type specific. We also showed that the cis-element-gene relationship in different cell types within the same class could be highly heterogenous. Moreover, we constructed transcription factor (TF)-target regulons for over 200 TFs, partitioned the TFs into distinct co-active modules, and annotated each module based on their cell-type specificity. Taken together, we present the most comprehensive single-cell multi-omics atlas of the human retina as a valuable resource that enables systematic in-depth molecular characterization at individual cell type resolution.

{% include link.html type="external" link="https://cells-test.gi.ucsc.edu/?ds=retina-atlas+atac" text="Explore" icon="" style="button" %}
{:.center}

## Gene expression values
A table of the gene expression values for BC subclasses’ pseudo bulk. Each value is the median of normalized expressions among samples in the meta datasets for BC subclasses pseudo bulk (i.e., FPKM values).

{% include link.html type="external" link="" text="Download" icon="" style="button" %}
{:.center}
